---
title:  "On Free Will and Meditation"
layout: post
categories: media
---

I had a sudden realization while thinking about how exactly meditation has changed my everyday being.
And I realized the changing might have some connections to free will. 

Imagine you paid a lawyer a lot of money to fill out one form for you. The entire reason you hired them was that the 
form is a sensitive one, and you can't afford to make any mistakes on it. Then the lawyer returns you the prepared form
and you immediately notice glaring a mistake - no wait, two of them. Your natural reaction is to completely lose it, 
fizz in anger, and feverishly start typing an email response to the creator of this situation. 

Usually, we all give in to the cues of our situation (and predispositions of our natures). Whether we react to any given
stimulus around us or not is largely predictable, ascribed to our _natures_. It's as if the particularities of our
upbringing and the genetics we are born with are the true decision makers in any given situation. 

Then where is 'free will' ? 

I am not a believer per se of "you can do anything, if you put your mind to it". I don't believe the truth of that
statement is why we all know of so many 'impossible' success stories. I believe those success stories happened because 
fundamentally they _were possible_. None of the stories are about getting 10,000 hours of tennis practice done in 5,000 
hours, because that is truly impossible. They are more so about doing something at age 40 that was thought to not be 
possible to do after age 28. But the reason one was able to do it, ultimately, because somewhere in our physical reality
there existed a path following which the person could accomplish this achievement. Maybe there were only 100 paths left 
by the time one is 40 years old; instead of 10 million when one is 20. However, if one is keen enough to notice any of
those 100 paths (and ensure they're on one path or the other out of the 100 even as they change paths along the way), 
the goal can be accomplished.

Ok what does this have to do with free will? So, here's the thing: the fact that _anything_ EVER was able to be produced
outside of the nature of a being is a cue that the world isn't only a deterministic universe. You could argue, that the 
person who accomplished something rare had a combination of a rare upbringing and circumstances to be able to achieve 
what they were able to - and I agree; of course, like I said, the _physical possibility_ must exist for the person to 
accomplish the feat. HOWEVER, the main interesting thing here is that I believe that things happen for reasons beyond 
the existence of the possibility, but additionally, due to the _choice_ of the being. 

Let me say why. For me, meditation has been a place where I can completely stop anything - any reaction to a stimulus
in front of me, any background distraction or disturbance I was experiencing, etc. Suddenly, I'm not feeling anything 
and am not a slave of either the circumstances or my nature/predispositions. In that moment, when I choose to take the 
next step, I can often do it in an arbitrary way. I feel free to take several steps; and in different moments I take 
different ones. Sometimes I'm also silently sitting down for long enough that someone else comes into my space and 
dictates for me what I should do next. I strongly suspect that those moments are not predetermined and governed by my 
tiny experience of the world or my genetic predispositions. If I have been feeling angry at a situation for 10 years of 
my life without fail, in that moment, I can still manage to feel nothing. There seems to be no obvious reason in nature 
or nurture for me to break such a strong pattern. But I have. Thus, it isn't convincing to me that that moment was 
predetermined. It feels everything against what was predetermined. In that moment, a being can even stare at themselves 
and notice, how it feels to simply exist. 

In a deterministic world, 'simply existing' hardly has a meaning. Everything has a cause and effect and each moment is 
only produced as a result of a previous and meant to birth the next. In this world, a moment is produced which fills me 
with strong rage and I verge on acting on it, but then am able to feel nothing the next minute, by just instead choosing 
to divert my attention to counting my breaths. The rage production was a waste. It doesn't lead to anything. No remnant 
remains that influence my decisions. But in a deterministic world, nothing should be a 'waste'. Every product must 
contribute to creating another; every effect would have a knock-on effect.